Rfc agent flow (#1546)
grafana/agent: docs/rfcs/0004-agent-flow.md

Agent Flow refers to both the execution, configuration and visual configurator of data flow.

The primary goals of Agent Flow are

1. Allow users to more easily understand the impact of their configuration
2. Allow users to collect metrics from all running integrations across a  set of agents without installing extra dependencies
3. Allow users to run components based on a dynamic environment
4. Allow developers to easily add components to the system
5. Ensure the Agent still maintains high performance on all platforms that the Agent currently supports
6. Flow configs must be easily machine-readable and machine-writable to support tooling, such as formatting and GUI

Goals of this design document

* Define high level concepts and goals
* Define high level concepts of the execution path

This document represents ideals and not technical implementation. 

Non Goals of this design document

* Define a technical implementation or configuration implementation

# 2. Broad Solution Path

Conversation around should the components be assembled via message passing, via expressions, or a hybrid approach.

**Note: Consider all examples pseudoconfig**

## 2.1 Expression Based

> Expression based is writing expressions that allow referencing other components streams/outputs/values and using them directly. 

Reviewer: Should we clarify that expressions also implies functions and arithmetic? something like `length(some_service_discovery.targets)`

**Pros**

* Easier to Implement, evaluating expressions can map directly to existing config structs

> * Components are more reusable, you can pass basic types arounds (string, int, bool)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Components are more reusable, you can pass basic types around (string, int, bool) in addition to custom types
```

**Cons**
* Harder for users to wire things together

> * Harder to build a GUI for

Reviewer: nit: this needs the "why"

light suggestion:

> * References to components are more complicated, which may be harder for users to understand how to wire things together
> * Every field of a component is potentially dynamic, making it harder to represent visually

> ## 2.2 Message Based

Reviewer: One thing that just came to mind: it's less obvious to users what fields a connection between two message-based components is overriding; you'd have to pull up the docs to figure out what the connection sets. Comparatively, in expressions, the settings being made dynamic is explicit and can be inferred just by reading the config file.

Author: Ideally, for most components, the user shouldn't need to worry about it. I do think there will be cases where they do and that will not be ideal.

Reviewer: The most common case I see is a user configuring a component: they need to make sure they don't configure both the static field and the connection, so they'll need to pull up the documentation to see what values are still required.

I think this will be the case when configuring a new component or editing an existing component to have a connection or to remove a connection and make it static.

Message based is where components have no knowledge of other components and information is passed strictly via input and output streams. 

**Pros**

* Easier for users to understand the dependencies between components

> * Easier to build a GUI for

Reviewer: nit: need the "why" it's easier :)

> * Ability to use more configuration formats easier

Reviewer: nit: 

```suggestion
* References between components are no more than strings, making the text-based representation language agnostic (e.g., it could be YAML, JSON, or any language)  
```

> **Cons**

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this is a con, or if it still counts as an "expression," but we would need to define custom types for things that can't be represented as a basic (number, bool, string) or complex type (array, dictionary). 

For example, we would require a type which is `log stream` for components which filter logs. 

I'm not sure if that makes it a message-based system (I don't think it does, things are still wired via expressions), but it does mean that it's impossible for us to represent 100% of the agent today in terms of existing basic / complex data types.

Reviewer: Oops, this should've been on expressions and not messages.

Author: Agreed, I think custom types are likely needed in both cases. Messages need considerably more than expressions.

* More time consuming to implement, existing integrations/items would need to be componentized

> * Larger type system needed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Larger type system needed to express custom message streams
```

* More structured to keep the amount of types down

Messages would require a more rigid and well defined type structure. For instance for getting credentials from various sources and passing those credentials around we would want to avoid the following.

* MySQLCredentials
* RedisCredentials
* RemoteWriteCredentials
* MySQLCredentialsSourceS3
* MySQLCredentialsSourceVault
* MySQLCredentialsSourceConsul
* RedisCredentialsSourceS3
* RedisCredentialsSourceVault
* RedisCredentialsSourceConsul
* RemoteWriteCredentialsSourceS3
* RemoteWriteCredentialsSourceVault
* RemoteWriteCredentialsSourceConsul

> And instead have one component that can read from many sources and outputs a single `Credential Type` and its up the destination component to intepret that correctly. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is possible, though. What would a single Credential type look like There's many different types of credentials; how would you distinguish between Basic Auth and Bearer Auth?

Author: Likely an enum or some other flag. May force the user into storing their credentials in a specific format.  

```
{
  "bearer-token" : "1234"
}
```

or
```
{
"basic-auth" 
  {
     "username":"1234"
      "password": "1234"
  }
}
```

## 2.3 Hybrid

## 2.4 Examples

### 2.4.1 Simple Example Mysql from Target Discovery

**Expression**

```
discovery "mysql_pods" {
    # some sort of config here to find pods
}

integration "mysql" {
  # Create one mysql integration for every element in the array here 
  for_each = discovery.mysql_pods.targets

  # Each spawned mysql integration has its data_source_name derived from 
  # the address label of the input target.
  data_source_name = "root@(${each.labels["__address__"]})"
}
```

**Message**

```
discovery "mysqlpods" {
    relabel_config {
        [
            {
                source = "__address__"
                match = "*mysql"
                action = "replace"

>                 replacement = "root@$1"

Reviewer: nit: doesn't a valid DSN require the parenthesis? `root@($1)`?

            }
        ]
    }
}

# I think this would depend on convention, mysql would look at __address__ , and maybe optionally look for username/password

> integration "mysql" {}

Reviewer: If there's no input target, would it be possible to still set `data_source_name` manually?

Author: Yes, the configuration can still be set internally. So the below would be valid.

```
integration "mysql" {
  datasource = root@(localhost)
  timeout = 10s
}
```

connections {
    [
        {
            source = mysqlpods
            destination = mysql
        }
    ]

> }

Reviewer: Is it an artifact of the design that connections between components are defined separate to the components?

# Agent Flow - Agent Utilizing Components 

* Date: 2022-03-30
* Author: Matt Durham (@mattdurham)
* PRs: 
    * [grafana/agent#1538](https://github.com/grafana/agent/pull/1538) - Problem Statement 
    * [grafana/agent#1546](https://github.com/grafana/agent/pull/1546) - Messages and Expressions
* Status: Draft

## Overarching Problem Statement

The Agents configuration and onboarding is difficult to use. Viewing the effect of configuration changes on telemetry data is difficult. Making the configuration simplier, composable and intuitive allieviates these concerns.

## Description

Agent Flow is intended to solve real world needs that the Grafana Agent team have idenfified in conversations with users and developers. 

> These broadly include 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These broadly include:
```

- Lack of introspection within the agent
    - Questions about what telemetry data are being sent
    - Are rules applying correctly?
    - How does filtering work?
- Users have been requesting additional capabilites and adding new features is hard due to coupling between systems, some examples include
    - Remote Write, Different Input Formats
    - Different output formats
    - Filtering ala Relabel Configs is complex and hard to figure out when they occur
- Lack of understanding how telemetry data moves through agent
    - Other systems use pipeline/extensions to allow users to understand how data moves through the system

# 1. Introduction and Goals 

> This design document describes Agent Flow, which is a system for describing the execution and configuration of telemetry data, along with any secondary configuration required to configure the Grafana Agent. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This design document outlines Agent Flow, a system for describing a programmable pipeline for telemetry data. 
```

Agent Flow refers to both the execution, configuration and visual configurator of data flow.

> The primary goals of Agent Flow are
> 
> 1. Allow users to more easily understand the impact of their configuration
> 2. Allow users to collect metrics from all running integrations across a  set of agents without installing extra dependencies
> 3. Allow users to run components based on a dynamic environment
> 4. Allow developers to easily add components to the system
> 5. Ensure the Agent still maintains high performance on all platforms that the Agent currently supports
> 6. Flow configs must be easily machine-readable and machine-writable to support tooling, such as formatting and GUI
> 
> Goals of this design document
> 
> * Define high level concepts and goals
> * Define high level concepts of the execution path
> 
> This document represents ideals and not technical implementation. 
> 
> Non Goals of this design document
> 
> * Define a technical implementation or configuration implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Goals 

* Allow users to more easily understand the impact of their configuration
* Allow users to collect integration metrics across a set of agents
* Allow users to run components based on a dynamic environment
* Allow developers to easily add components to the system
* Maintain high performance on all currently-supported platforms
* Produce machine-readable and machine-writable configs for tooling such as formatters or a GUI.

### Non-goals

* Discuss technical details: we instead focus on how a user would interact with a hypothetical implementation of Agent Flow.
```

# 2. Broad Solution Path

> Conversation around should the components be assembled via message passing, via expressions, or a hybrid approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At a high level, Agent Flow:

* Breaks apart the existing hierarchical configuration file into reusable components 
* Allows components to be connected, resulting in a programmable pipeline of telemetry data

This document considers three potential approaches to allow users to connect components together: 

1. Message passing (i.e., an actor model) 
2. Expressions (i.e., directly referencing the output of another component)
3. A hybrid of both messages and expressions  
```

**Note: Consider all examples pseudoconfig**

## 2.1 Expression Based

Expression based is writing expressions that allow referencing other components streams/outputs/values and using them directly. Expressions allow referencing other fields, along with complex programming concepts. (functions, arithmetic ect). For instance `field1 = len(service_discover1.targets)`.

**Pros**

* Easier to Implement, evaluating expressions can map directly to existing config structs
* Components are more reusable, you can pass basic types around (string, int, bool) in addition to custom types

**Cons**
* Harder for users to wire things together
  * References to components are more complex, which may be harder to understand 
* Harder to build a GUI for
  * Every field of a component is potentially dynamic, making it harder to represent visually

## 2.2 Message Based

Message based is where components have no knowledge of other components and information is passed strictly via input and output streams. 

**Pros**

* Easier for users to understand the dependencies between components
* Easier to build a GUI for

>     * Inputs and Outputs are well typed

Reviewer: Expressions are well-typed too, there's just more basic types like string vs only having custom types.

Author: Will play with the verbiage there

>     * Messages mean users are only dragging outputs to inputs. The components themselves determine how to interpret the input needing less configuration from the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Connections are made by connecting two components directly, compared to expressions which connect subsets of a component's output
```

* References between components are no more than strings, making the text-based representation language agnostic (e.g., it could be YAML, JSON, or any language)  

**Cons**

* More time consuming to implement, existing integrations/items would need to be componentized
* Larger type system needed
* More structured to keep the amount of types down

> Messages would require a more rigid and well defined type structure. For instance for getting credentials from various sources and passing those credentials around we would want to avoid the following.
> 
> * MySQLCredentials
> * RedisCredentials
> * RemoteWriteCredentials
> * MySQLCredentialsSourceS3
> * MySQLCredentialsSourceVault
> * MySQLCredentialsSourceConsul
> * RedisCredentialsSourceS3
> * RedisCredentialsSourceVault
> * RedisCredentialsSourceConsul
> * RemoteWriteCredentialsSourceS3
> * RemoteWriteCredentialsSourceVault
> * RemoteWriteCredentialsSourceConsul
> 
> And instead have one component that can read from many sources and outputs a single `Credential Type` and its up the destination component to intepret that correctly. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Messages require a more rigid type structure to minimize the number of total components. 

For example, it would be preferable to have a single `Credential` type that can be emitted by an s3, Vault, or Consul component. These components would then need to set a field that marks their output as a specific kind of Credential (such as Basic Auth or Bearer Auth).

If, instead, you had multiple Credential types, like `MySQLCredentials` and `RedisCredentials`, you would have the following components:

* Vault component for MySQL credentials 
* Vault component for Redis credentials 
* S3 component for MySQL credentials 
* S3 component for Redis credentials 
* (and so on)
```
